AiiDA post (#286)
SwissDataScienceCenter/renku-blog: blog/2025-10-10-aiida-success-story/index.mdx

![intro-image](intro-image.png)

<!-- truncate -->

## The Challenge: Valuable Data Behind Technical Barriers

Computational science generates valuable data that can accelerate research—given that it’s
accessible to the community at large. This is where the [Materials Cloud
Archive](https://www.materialscloud.org/home) (MCA) was facing a bit of an issue: while the
platform was hosting plenty of computational (materials science) research data, accessing it
required a rather technical local setup, not accessible to everyone.

This is because the data consists of archives created using the AiiDA workflow manager, and,
"exploring AiiDA archives historically required users to install AiiDA locally with complex
dependencies like PostgreSQL and RabbitMQ," the development team explains. For this reason "users
also needed prior knowledge of AiiDA's API to explore the data."

The complexity meant valuable research data was effectively locked away from researchers who weren't
already familiar with AiiDA. And even experienced users had to manually download archives, configure
environments, and set up profiles before beginning actual research—wasting time that could be spent

> on discovery.

Reviewer: wording maybe less negative

website](https://www.aiida.net/news/index/category/blog.html).

## The Impact: Lowering the Barrier to Access

![mca-project-page.jpg](mca-project-page.jpg)

What once required complex local installations, prior AiiDA knowledge, and manual configuration
steps is now accessible with a single click. Researchers can discover data on MCA and immediately
explore it interactively without any local setup or risk of modifying their existing installations.

"Without the infrastructure provided by Renku, the first working online deployment would likely have
been achieved much later," notes the development team. While they've also been working on
alternative solutions like an AiiDAlab demo server, the Renku integration was established five years
ago and continues to evolve—demonstrating the value of leveraging existing platforms rather than
building from scratch.

## Looking Forward: Expanding the Partnership

The AiiDA team is exploring further expansions using Renku 2.0's new capabilities:

**Expanding data access via Renku Data Connectors:** The AiiDA team is exploring Renku 2.0's new
data connectors to mount MCA archives directly in project filesystems, which would eliminate

> download times and storage limitations—crucial for large archives like a recent 15TB AiiDA project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
download times and storage limitations—crucial for large archives.
```
The 15tb one is really an odd one out, not sure we should mention this here. Also, the person is creating individual archives from their whole data set, as it is too massive otherwise.

> **Supporting the broader AiiDA App Ecosystem:** With Renku 2.0's support for arbitrary Docker
> images, they're exploring integrating other AiiDA applications like the Quantum ESPRESSO GUI.
> Hosting these apps on RenkuLab could reduce their own maintenance overhead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Supporting the broader AiiDA App Ecosystem:** With Renku 2.0's support for arbitrary Docker
images, they're exploring expanding the integration to other AiiDA applications like AiiDAlab.
With this, users would be able to use the graphical user interface (GUI) provided by AiiDAlab, rather than just a single jupyter landing notebook.
```

I think this is more the gist of it, at least for this integration. If we don't _have_ to use a Renku docker image, but could use our own AiiDAlab ones, users would be able to directly use the GUI of AiiDAlab. And, we could write additional GUI components, e.g., expose the "data dumping" feature of AiiDA that I'm showing in the last screenshot of our post, via GUI, rather than through code in a notebook cell.

## The Power of Collaboration

> "Keep it simple- Why re-invent the wheel when a fitting solution already exists? Often it's better
> to invest time finding and familiarizing yourself with existing solutions rather than recreating
> your own." says the AiiDA team. "Renku has been very stable throughout the various steps of the
> integration. Their team has always been responsive and super helpful with any concerns or technical
> difficulties."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Why reinvent the wheel when a fitting solution already exists? Often (but not always, of course) it can be the quicker path to a solution
to invest the time finding and familiarizing oneself with existing infrastructure rather than recreating
it by yourself from scratch---a classical case of KISS (_keep it simple, stupid_)." says the AiiDA team. "Renku has been very stable throughout the various steps of the
integration. Their team has always been responsive and super helpful with any concerns or technical
difficulties."
```

By removing barriers between data discovery and analysis, RenkuLab enables more researchers to
engage with computational datasets, ultimately accelerating scientific discovery.

The Materials Cloud Archive integration demonstrates how research infrastructure can evolve from
serving primarily expert users to welcoming the broader scientific community—turning technical

> barriers into bridges for collaboration and discovery.

Reviewer: Reads very nicely, but a bit like GenAI to me ^^
Overall, I re-phrased many parts again in our post.
